README.md, before:

[![official JetBrains project](https://jb.gg/badges/official.svg)](https://confluence.jetbrains.com/display/ALL/JetBrains+on+GitHub)
[![Twitter Follow](https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/JBPlatform?style=flat)](https://twitter.com/JBPlatform/)
![Gradle Plugin](https://img.shields.io/maven-metadata/v.svg?label=Gradle%20Plugin&color=blue&metadataUrl=https://plugins.gradle.org/m2/org/jetbrains/intellij/plugins/gradle-changelog-plugin/maven-metadata.xml)
![Build](https://github.com/JetBrains/gradle-changelog-plugin/workflows/Build/badge.svg)

# Gradle Changelog Plugin

**This project requires Gradle 5.0 or newer**

A Gradle plugin that provides tasks and helper methods to let the working with the changelog managed
in a [keep a changelog][keep-a-changelog] style easier.

## Usage

Kotlin:
```kotlin
import org.jetbrains.changelog.closure

plugins {
    id("org.jetbrains.changelog") version "0.3.3"
}

tasks {
    // ...

    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes(closure { changelog.getUnreleased().toHTML() })
    }
}

changelog {
    version = "${project.version}"
    path = "${project.projectDir}/CHANGELOG.md"
    headerFormat = "[{0}]"
    headerArguments = listOf("${project.version}")
    itemPrefix = "-"
    keepUnreleasedSection = true
    unreleasedTerm = "[Unreleased]"
}
```

Groovy:
```groovy
plugins {
    id 'org.jetbrains.changelog' version '0.3.3'
}

apply plugin: 'org.jetbrains.changelog'

intellij {
    // ...

    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes({ changelog.getUnreleased().toHTML() })
    }
}

changelog {
    version = "${project.version}"
    path = "${project.projectDir}/CHANGELOG.md"
    headerFormat = "[{0}]"
    headerArguments = ["${project.version}"]
    itemPrefix = "-"
    keepUnreleasedSection = true
    unreleasedTerm = "[Unreleased]"
}
```

> **Note:** `closure` is a wrapper for the `KotlinClosure0` class and can be used directly as following:
> ```kotlin
> import org.gradle.kotlin.dsl.KotlinClosure0
> 
> changeNotes(KotlinClosure0({ changelog.getUnreleased() }))
> ```


## Configuration

Plugin can be configured with the following properties set in the `changelog {}` closure:

| Property                | Description                                                | Default value                          |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `headerArguments`       | Arguments passed to the header by the patchChangelog task. | `["${project.version}"]`               |
| `headerFormat`          | Format of the version section header.                      | `"[{0}]"`                              |
| `itemPrefix`            | Single item's prefix, allows to customise the bullet sign. | `"-"`                                  |
| `keepUnreleasedSection` | Add Unreleased empty section after patching.               | `true`                                 |
| `patchEmpty`            | Patches changelog even if no release note is provided.     | `true`                                 |
| `path`                  | Path to the changelog file.                                | `"${project.projectDir}/CHANGELOG.md"` |
| `unreleasedTerm`        | Unreleased section text.                                   | `"[Unreleased]"`                       |
| `version`               | Current project's version.                                 | `"${project.version}"`                 |


## Tasks

The plugin introduces the following tasks:

| Task             | Description                                          |
| ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| `getChangelog`   | Retrieves changelog for the specified version.       |
| `patchChangelog` | Updates the unreleased section to the given version. |

### `getChangelog`

#### Options

| Option          | Description                                        |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `--no-header`   | Skips the first version header line in the output. |
| `--unreleased`  | Returns Unreleased change notes.                   |

#### Examples

```bash
$ ./gradlew getChangelog --no-daemon --console=plain -q --no-header

### Added
- Initial project scaffold
- GitHub Actions to automate testing and deployment
- Kotlin support
```


## Methods

All the methods are available via the `changelog` extension and allow for reading the changelog file within
the Gradle tasks to provide the latest (or specific) change notes.

> **Note:** Following methods depend on the `changelog` extension, which is set in the *Configuration*
> [build phase][build-phases]. To make it running properly, it's required to place the configuration before the fist
> usage of such a method. Alternatively, you can pass the Gradle closure to the task, which will postpone the method
> invocation.

### `get`

The method returns a `Changelog.Item` object for the specified version.
Throws `MissingVersionException` if the version is not available.

It is possible to specify the *unreleased* section with setting the `${changelog.unreleasedTerm}` value.


#### Parameters

| Parameter   | Type      | Description             | Default value          |
| ----------- | --------- | ----------------------- | ---------------------- |
| `version`   | `String`  | Change note version.    | `${changelog.version}` |

#### Examples

Kotlin:
```kotlin
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes(closure { changelog.get("1.0.0").toHTML() })
    }
}
```

Groovy:
```groovy
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes({ changelog.get("1.0.0").toHTML() })
    }
}
```

### `getUnreleased`

The method returns a `Changelog.Item` object for the *unreleased* version.

#### Examples

Kotlin:
```kotlin
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes(closure { changelog.getUnreleased().toHTML() })
    }
}
```

Groovy:
```groovy
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes({ changelog.getUnreleased().toHTML() })
    }
}
```

### `getLatest`

The method returns the latest `Changelog.Item` object (first on the list).

#### Examples

Kotlin:
```kotlin
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes(closure { changelog.getLatest().toHTML() })
    }
}
```

Groovy:
```groovy
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes({ changelog.getLatest().toHTML() })
    }
}
```

### `hasVersion`

The method checks if the giver version exists in the changelog

#### Examples

Kotlin:
```kotlin
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        closure { changelog.hasVersion() }
    }
}
```

Groovy:
```groovy
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        { changelog.hasVersion() }
    }
}
```

## `Changelog.Item`

Methods described in the above section return `Changelog.Item` object, which is a representation of the single
changelog section for the specific version. It provides a couple of properties and methods that allow altering
the output form of the change notes:

### Properties 

| Name      | Type      | Description             |
| --------- | --------- | ----------------------- |
| `version` | `String`  | Change note version.    |

### Methods

| Name                | Description                    | Returned type |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------- |
| `noHeader()`        | Excludes header part.          | `this`        |
| `noHeader(Boolean)` | Includes/excludes header part. | `this`        |
| `getHeader()`       | Returns header text.           | `String`      |
| `toText()`          | Generates Markdown output.     | `String`      |
| `toPlainText()`     | Generates Plain Text output.   | `String`      |
| `toString()`        | Generates Markdown output.     | `String`      |
| `toHTML()`          | Generates HTML output.         | `String`      |

## Gradle Closure in Kotlin DSL

To produce Gradle-specific closure in Kotlin DSL, required by some third-party plugins, like
[gradle-intellij-plugin][gradle-intellij-plugin] it is required to wrap the Kotlin Unit with `KotlinClosure0` class:

```kotlin
KotlinClosure0({ changelog.get() })
```

There is also a *neater* method available:

```kotlin
import org.jetbrains.changelog.closure

closure { changelog.get() }
```

## Usage Examples

- [Unity Support for ReSharper and Rider](https://github.com/JetBrains/resharper-unity)
- [IntelliJ Plugin Template](https://github.com/JetBrains/intellij-plugin-template)
- [Package Search](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/12507-package-search)

[build-phases]: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/build_lifecycle.html#sec:build_phases
[keep-a-changelog]: https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0
[gradle-intellij-plugin]: https://github.com/JetBrains/gradle-intellij-plugin

Commit message:

`getAll` extensions method for fetching all changelog items

README.md, after:

[![official JetBrains project](https://jb.gg/badges/official.svg)](https://confluence.jetbrains.com/display/ALL/JetBrains+on+GitHub)
[![Twitter Follow](https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/JBPlatform?style=flat)](https://twitter.com/JBPlatform/)
![Gradle Plugin](https://img.shields.io/maven-metadata/v.svg?label=Gradle%20Plugin&color=blue&metadataUrl=https://plugins.gradle.org/m2/org/jetbrains/intellij/plugins/gradle-changelog-plugin/maven-metadata.xml)
![Build](https://github.com/JetBrains/gradle-changelog-plugin/workflows/Build/badge.svg)

# Gradle Changelog Plugin

**This project requires Gradle 5.0 or newer**

A Gradle plugin that provides tasks and helper methods to let the working with the changelog managed
in a [keep a changelog][keep-a-changelog] style easier.

## Usage

Kotlin:
```kotlin
import org.jetbrains.changelog.closure

plugins {
    id("org.jetbrains.changelog") version "0.3.3"
}

tasks {
    // ...

    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes(closure { changelog.getUnreleased().toHTML() })
    }
}

changelog {
    version = "${project.version}"
    path = "${project.projectDir}/CHANGELOG.md"
    headerFormat = "[{0}]"
    headerArguments = listOf("${project.version}")
    itemPrefix = "-"
    keepUnreleasedSection = true
    unreleasedTerm = "[Unreleased]"
}
```

Groovy:
```groovy
plugins {
    id 'org.jetbrains.changelog' version '0.3.3'
}

apply plugin: 'org.jetbrains.changelog'

intellij {
    // ...

    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes({ changelog.getUnreleased().toHTML() })
    }
}

changelog {
    version = "${project.version}"
    path = "${project.projectDir}/CHANGELOG.md"
    headerFormat = "[{0}]"
    headerArguments = ["${project.version}"]
    itemPrefix = "-"
    keepUnreleasedSection = true
    unreleasedTerm = "[Unreleased]"
}
```

> **Note:** `closure` is a wrapper for the `KotlinClosure0` class and can be used directly as following:
> ```kotlin
> import org.gradle.kotlin.dsl.KotlinClosure0
> 
> changeNotes(KotlinClosure0({ changelog.getUnreleased() }))
> ```


## Configuration

Plugin can be configured with the following properties set in the `changelog {}` closure:

| Property                | Description                                                | Default value                          |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `headerArguments`       | Arguments passed to the header by the patchChangelog task. | `["${project.version}"]`               |
| `headerFormat`          | Format of the version section header.                      | `"[{0}]"`                              |
| `itemPrefix`            | Single item's prefix, allows to customise the bullet sign. | `"-"`                                  |
| `keepUnreleasedSection` | Add Unreleased empty section after patching.               | `true`                                 |
| `patchEmpty`            | Patches changelog even if no release note is provided.     | `true`                                 |
| `path`                  | Path to the changelog file.                                | `"${project.projectDir}/CHANGELOG.md"` |
| `unreleasedTerm`        | Unreleased section text.                                   | `"[Unreleased]"`                       |
| `version`               | Current project's version.                                 | `"${project.version}"`                 |


## Tasks

The plugin introduces the following tasks:

| Task             | Description                                          |
| ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| `getChangelog`   | Retrieves changelog for the specified version.       |
| `patchChangelog` | Updates the unreleased section to the given version. |

### `getChangelog`

#### Options

| Option          | Description                                        |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `--no-header`   | Skips the first version header line in the output. |
| `--unreleased`  | Returns Unreleased change notes.                   |

#### Examples

```bash
$ ./gradlew getChangelog --no-daemon --console=plain -q --no-header

### Added
- Initial project scaffold
- GitHub Actions to automate testing and deployment
- Kotlin support
```


## Methods

All the methods are available via the `changelog` extension and allow for reading the changelog file within
the Gradle tasks to provide the latest (or specific) change notes.

> **Note:** Following methods depend on the `changelog` extension, which is set in the *Configuration*
> [build phase][build-phases]. To make it running properly, it's required to place the configuration before the fist
> usage of such a method. Alternatively, you can pass the Gradle closure to the task, which will postpone the method
> invocation.

### `get`

The method returns a `Changelog.Item` object for the specified version.
Throws `MissingVersionException` if the version is not available.

It is possible to specify the *unreleased* section with setting the `${changelog.unreleasedTerm}` value.


#### Parameters

| Parameter   | Type      | Description             | Default value          |
| ----------- | --------- | ----------------------- | ---------------------- |
| `version`   | `String`  | Change note version.    | `${changelog.version}` |

#### Examples

Kotlin:
```kotlin
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes(closure { changelog.get("1.0.0").toHTML() })
    }
}
```

Groovy:
```groovy
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes({ changelog.get("1.0.0").toHTML() })
    }
}
```

### `getUnreleased`

The method returns a `Changelog.Item` object for the *unreleased* version.

#### Examples

Kotlin:
```kotlin
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes(closure { changelog.getUnreleased().toHTML() })
    }
}
```

Groovy:
```groovy
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes({ changelog.getUnreleased().toHTML() })
    }
}
```

### `getLatest`

The method returns the latest `Changelog.Item` object (first on the list).

#### Examples

Kotlin:
```kotlin
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes(closure { changelog.getLatest().toHTML() })
    }
}
```

Groovy:
```groovy
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        changeNotes({ changelog.getLatest().toHTML() })
    }
}
```

### `getAll`

The method returns all available `Changelog.Item` objects.

#### Examples

Kotlin:
```kotlin
extension.getAll().values.map { it.toText() }
```

Groovy:
```groovy
extension.getAll().values().each { it.toText() }
```

### `hasVersion`

The method checks if the giver version exists in the changelog

#### Examples

Kotlin:
```kotlin
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        closure { changelog.hasVersion() }
    }
}
```

Groovy:
```groovy
tasks {
    patchPluginXml {
        { changelog.hasVersion() }
    }
}
```

## `Changelog.Item`

Methods described in the above section return `Changelog.Item` object, which is a representation of the single
changelog section for the specific version. It provides a couple of properties and methods that allow altering
the output form of the change notes:

### Properties 

| Name      | Type      | Description             |
| --------- | --------- | ----------------------- |
| `version` | `String`  | Change note version.    |

### Methods

| Name                | Description                    | Returned type |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------- |
| `noHeader()`        | Excludes header part.          | `this`        |
| `noHeader(Boolean)` | Includes/excludes header part. | `this`        |
| `getHeader()`       | Returns header text.           | `String`      |
| `toText()`          | Generates Markdown output.     | `String`      |
| `toPlainText()`     | Generates Plain Text output.   | `String`      |
| `toString()`        | Generates Markdown output.     | `String`      |
| `toHTML()`          | Generates HTML output.         | `String`      |

## Gradle Closure in Kotlin DSL

To produce Gradle-specific closure in Kotlin DSL, required by some third-party plugins, like
[gradle-intellij-plugin][gradle-intellij-plugin] it is required to wrap the Kotlin Unit with `KotlinClosure0` class:

```kotlin
KotlinClosure0({ changelog.get() })
```

There is also a *neater* method available:

```kotlin
import org.jetbrains.changelog.closure

closure { changelog.get() }
```

## Usage Examples

- [Unity Support for ReSharper and Rider](https://github.com/JetBrains/resharper-unity)
- [IntelliJ Plugin Template](https://github.com/JetBrains/intellij-plugin-template)
- [Package Search](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/12507-package-search)

[build-phases]: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/build_lifecycle.html#sec:build_phases
[keep-a-changelog]: https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0
[gradle-intellij-plugin]: https://github.com/JetBrains/gradle-intellij-plugin
